---
layout: post
title: 'Gradle Dependency Resolution Shorts: Publication Coordinates, Redux'
author: Luke Bemish
categories:
  - Gradle Dependencies
---

I noted [in a previous post]({% post_url 2026-02-22-gradle-shorts-1-publication-coordinates %}) that Gradle does not play
nice with multiple published `SoftwareComponent`s in a single project; in particular, this causes issues when calculating the
coordinates of the project in question for publishing project dependencies, and it is therefore not feasible or desired to
relocate a secondary publication by setting `artifactId` or `groupId` as a means to creating an "alias".

It turns out, there's some fun subtlety here! Gradle's `PublicationInternal` type, an internal protocol type used by
`MavenPublication` and `IvyPublication`'s implementations, has a [`setAlias(boolean)` method](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/blob/0f3d2550185f6d16c9a0aa58ec4c4c1025197a27/platforms/software/publish/src/main/java/org/gradle/api/publish/internal/PublicationInternal.java#L34). Setting this property
causes the underlying publication to be [ignored for the purpose of computing the coordinates of the project](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/blob/0f3d2550185f6d16c9a0aa58ec4c4c1025197a27/platforms/software/dependency-management/src/main/java/org/gradle/api/internal/artifacts/ivyservice/projectmodule/DefaultProjectDependencyPublicationResolver.java#L119-L124) for project
dependencies — meaning that we could assign a secondary component to a publication with this flag set and relocate it using
`artifactId`/`groupId` without issue, though we'd still have to be careful about depending on build-time capability values
(which is likely not a large issue at least for the use case of redirecting one module to a feature variant of another).
This would look something like:

```gradle
// build.gradle for :foo
publishing {
    def other = softwareComponentFactory.adhoc('other')
    publications {
        mavenJava(MavenPublication) {
            from components.java
        }
        mavenOther(MavenPublication) {
            "*somehow* get this publication to be setAlias(true)"
            from other
            artifactId = 'not-foo'
        }
    }
}
```

Now obviously the interesting step here is getting the publication to be an alias without using internal APIs. To the best of
my knowledge, the only place Gradle makes alias publications is marker publications generated by the ivy and maven plugin publish
plugins.

There's one other interesting wrinkle here, that being the case of software components that are `ComponentWithVariants`.
Note that unintuitively, an `AdhocComponentWithVariants` is **not** a `ComponentWithVariants`, so this doesn't apply to most
java project publishing examples, but it does apply to using Gradle in a native project. These components have a list of
child components, and their children are not considered when calculating project coordinates.

...unfortunately, none of this is super usable, but they're interesting exceptions to the general rule noted in the earlier
post, so I thought it to be worth sharing.
